This is the control room for SET (JET) -
Joint European Toroid at Culham's Fusion Energy Center.
SET is a nuclear fusion experiment,
a scientific research facility that we hope to do
the first step on the way to a hearty and pure fusion energy.
When it is in operation, the interior of the reactor is literally
the warmest place in the solar system with temperatures
about ten times warmer than the sun's core.
Within a few minutes there will be another experiment
or as they call it here: pulse.
We are currently conducting a series of trafficking experiments.
Plasma actually does not want to be present in the reactor.
When it is finished, it creates quite a lot of mechanical energy,
which is able to vibrate the entire reactor. And in future power plants
we certainly want to avoid these problems.
So, right now, the huge, seven hundred tons of big flywheels spin,
to provide enough energy for the experiment itself.
Less than a hundredth of a gram of gas is prepared in a vacuum vessel next to the toroid
and when the pulse starts, it pushes him in and he gets warmed up with
huge magnets, by injection of hydrogen atoms
and by the power of the radio frequency waves that drift in.
This creates superheated plasma.
And when it reaches a temperature of about 100 million degrees Celsius,
we will see our own nuclear fusion.
At atom splitting, you always try to slow down and actually control the reaction.
And we do the exact opposite.
And so it is not possible for us to get into a situation,
where an accident of huge dimensions such as fission could occur.
There are a lot of device protection devices that track the whole experiment.
If anything goes wrong, the power supply is cut off and the whole system simply stops.
But there is also a protective system you would not have expected,
for safety if something is wrong.
Upper ceiling speakers are surround sound speakers
connected to the microphones in the reactor hall where no one has access.
These speakers transmit the sound of the experiment itself
to the real-time control room team. As if standing-
- as if this place where I stood was,
right in the middle of that toroid.
And all that complicated device protection is definitely necessary,
and each part of it. Computers can respond much faster than we do.
This small delay between perception and response can make a difference
between safe shutdown and a bit more expensive bills for repair.
But if something goes wrong slightly,
like when you hear the faint, strange sound of the engine in your car,
people will notice it before computers.
A few years back, we had an experiment disruption and we heard such a dull sound.
We were able to determine the exact area where we were supposed to source the sound.
Finally we found out that it was a vise holding a pipe.
And we were immediately able to get into the area,
where did we assume the sound was coming out,
we found a trumpet and could fix the vice.
Local engineers have taken human capacity,
that feeling, which was developed several hundred million years of evolution,
that something is slightly wrong, something does not fit,
and they used it here, in one of the most amazing things,
what humanity has ever built.
OK. Now comes the pulse.
(Five, four, three, two, one, zero ...)
Translation: minihry36 Subtitled by minihry36